---
title: Activities
---

# {{ page.title }}
{:.no_toc}

{% include toc.html %}



## Overview

Activities are events that **capture an action performed by a
participant** that **changes the state of the session**.

They are **value objects** and should thus be immutable.

Handling activities is performed on the **Inversion of Control
pattern**.

All activities should inherit from `IActivity`, thus ensuring that they
are "automatically" directed to the proper activity **receivers that
execute them**.

An activity provider is **responsible for creating and executing** one
or more activity types.

Activity providers **execute their activities locally**.

Providers report when they **create an activity to the registered
listeners** by calling `IActivityListener.activityCreated(IActivity)`.

The provider is intended to use
`ISarosSession#addActivityProvider(IActivityProvider)`, which in turn
**will register** the `ISarosSession `to the provider. This way, the
provider can **fire activities for a Saros session** by calling
`activityCreated()`.

## How Saros handles activities

*Warning: this documentation is partially out of date*

The core functionality of Saros is to **intercept several relevant
actions in Eclipse** (like inserting text, selecting text, opening
files) and **reproducing these actions** at other clients of the DPP
session.

Especially **modifications are important** to reproduce.

At the beginning of the session **every member gets the current
version** of the project.

During the session **every modification of a resource** has to be
**performed on all other clients**, to keep up the **synchronal state**
of the project at all clients.

The following figure shows the main interfaces and classes of Saros
handling activities.

![](../images/technical_doc/classesinterfaces.png)

Activities are created when listeners **catch a relevant action in
Eclipse**.

Like a keypress in a project file editor is caught by a
`IDocumentListenerÂ `that was registered at the Eclipse framework.

Activities will be **wrapped in an object**, **get a timestamp**, **put
in a queue** and **transmitted as XMPP message** (XML format) to other
clients of a DPP session.

On their end the activity object **will be recreated by examining the
XML body** of the received message, creating an **activity object**,
**put it in a timestamp ordered list** and **sequentially executed** on
the clients Eclipse environment.

![](../images/technical_doc/activitySend.png)

Creating and sending an activity

![](../images/technical_doc/activityReceive.png)

Receiving and repeating an activity


Activities are the most important way of communication to keep a *Shared
Session* consistent.

## Client Sending

The following Diagram shows how Activities are sent by clients in Saros.
Notice that the Host also acts as a Client for locally created
Activities.

![](../images/technical_doc/architecture_ActivitySending.svg)

New Activities are created by the *Activity Providers*. They take
actions of the local user and transform them to Activities. As *Activity
Providers* are registered at the *Session Management* the *Activity
Handling* gets informed about the new Activity and sets the Host as
target for this Activity. If the Activity is Jupiter related it will
first be passed to the *Concurrency Management* where it will be
transformed.

Afterward the Activity will be passed to the *Activity Sequencer* where
it will be queued and also gets a timestamp to ensure a global ordering
of Activities. The *OutgoingActivityQueue* is polled frequently and the
Activities will then be passed to the *ITransmitter* where they are
transformed into XMPP-messages and transmitted to the Host.

## Activity Server

All Clients send their Activities to the Server located at the Host. The
following diagram shows how the Server handles and directs incoming
Activities.

![](../images/technical_doc/architecture_ActivityServer.svg)

Every participant receives Activities via the *IReceiver*. The
*IReceiver* allows other components to register *packetListeners* that
will be informed when Messages with a specific *PackageExtension*
arrive. The *Activity Sequencer* also registers such a listener and will
be informed when new Activities arrive. The *Activity Sequencer* checks
that the Activity has the right sequence-number and if so passes it to
the *Activity Handling*.

The *Activity Handling* distinguishes between three different types of
Activities:

1.  *Jupiter related Activity*: Activities that are related to the
    *Jupiter*-Algorithm will be passed to the *Concurrency Management*
    where they will be transformed into an Activity with a different
    timestamps for each participant. Every participants gets a separate
    Activity and is set as its receiver.
2.  *ITargetedActivity*: When processing an *ITargetedActivity* the
    receiver will be set as the target of the Activity.
3.  *Others:* The receivers of all other Activities are all participants
    except the creator of the Activity.

After setting the right receivers the Activities will again be send to
the *ITransmitter*, via the *Activity Sequencer*, and transmitted to the
intended receivers.

## Client Receiving

After the Server has distributed the Activities all intended Clients
receive them. Again, remember that the Host also acts as a Client
despite housing the Server. The following diagram shows how the
receiving works.

![](../images/technical_doc/architecture_ActivityReceiving.svg)

When a new Activity arrives the *Activity Sequencer* will be informed
about this and passes the Activity to the *Activity Handling*.

The *Activity Handling* passes incoming Activities to the *Concurrency
Control* if needed. For example a *JupiterActivity* will be transformed
back into a *TextEditActivity*. Afterwards the *Activitiy Handling*
informs all registered *Activity Providers* about the new Activity.
Every *Activity Provider* checks himself if he is responsible for this
type of Activity. If responsible the *Activity Provider* transforms the
Activity back into an action, that can be applied to the local
Saros-Instance and executes this action.